Move sustained immunity and viral shedding out of pathogenesis (?) (#631)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/10.diagnostics.md

A simple SIR model predicts that to achieve the required level of exposure for herd immunity to be effective, at least (1-(1/R0)) fraction of the population must be immune or, equivalently, less than (1/R0) fraction of the population susceptible [@isbn:9780199209996].
However, for SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19, because of the calculated R0 and mortality and the recorded per-region deaths and accumulated cases with the estimated factor of undetected cases, relying on herd immunity without vaccines and/or proven treatment options and/or strong non-pharmaceutical measures of prevention and control would likely result in a significant loss of life.

#### Sustained Immunity to COVID-19

In the process of mounting a response to a viral pathogen, the immune system produces antibodies specific to the pathogen.
Understanding the acquisition and retention of antibodies is important both to the diagnosis of prior infections that are no longer active and to the development of vaccines.

> The two immunoglobulin classes most pertinent to these areas of interest are immunoglobulin M (IgM), which are the first antibodies produced in response to an infection, and immunoglobulin G (IgG), which are the most common antibodies found in the blood.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The two immunoglobulin classes most pertinent to these areas of interest are immunoglobulin M (IgM), which are the first antibodies produced in response to an infection, and immunoglobulin G (IgG), which are the most abundant antibodies found in the blood.
```

> Following SARS infection, IgM antibodies were first detected in most patients during the second week following infection and remained detectable until the twelfth week, while IgG antibodies were first detected in the second or third week and remained at close to their peak concentration through the thirteen weeks of the study [@doi:10.1056/NEJM200307313490520].

Reviewer: Original reference here was a letter to editor. Potential replacement reference:

```suggestion
Following SARS infection, IgM and IgG antibodies were detected in the second week post-infection. IgM titers peaked by the first month post-infection, and then declined to undetectable levels after day 180. IgG titers peaked by day 60, and persisted in all donors through the two-year duration of study. [@doi:10.1111/j.1440-1843.2006.00783.x].
```

A two-year longitudinal study following convalesced SARS patients with a mean age of 29 found that IgG antibodies were detectable in all 56 patients surveyed for at least 16 months, and remained detectable in all but 4 (11.8%) of patients through the full two-year study period [@doi:10.1086/500469].

> The longevity of antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 remains an ongoing question.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The persistence of antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 remains under investigation. Circulating antibody titers to other coronaviruses have been reported to decline significantly after 1 year. [@doi:10.1017/s0950268800048019]
```

The persistence of antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 remains under investigation.
Circulating antibody titers to other coronaviruses have been reported to decline significantly after 1 year [@doi:10.1017/s0950268800048019].
An early study (initially released on _medRxiv_ on February 25, 2020) presented a chemiluminescence immunoassay to a synthetic peptide derived from the amino acid sequence of the SARS_CoV-2 _S_ protein [@doi:10.1093/infdis/jiaa243].
This method was highly specific to SARS-CoV-2 and detected IgM in 57.2% and IgG in 71.4% and 57.2% of sera samples from 276 confirmed COVID-19 patients.
They reported that they could detect IgG within two days of the onset of fever and were not able to detect IgM any earlier, a pattern they compared to findings in MERS.   
<!--TODO: add https://www.nature.com/articles/s41591-020-0965-6#Sec9 and evalute reports of recurrence. Pausing for now because moving this section out of pathogenesis-->

> 

Author: Incorporating @gregszetoAI's [comment](https://github.com/greenelab/covid19-review/pull/631#discussion_r483424115)
```suggestion
However, although antibody titers often wane over time, these reduced levels do not necessarily indicate a loss of effective immune protection.
For example, memory cells can rapidly recall and produce antibodies on demand in the event of a second infection. 
One study reported an asymptomatic second infection of COVID-19 [@doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa1275].
No antibodies were detected until day 5 after the second infection, suggesting potential immune protection from symptoms. 

```
